Imagine two students of bioinformatics. Both of them competent, ambitious, and highly motivated. Now look at them after 20 years: one of them has become an able trainer, a respected mentor, and if anyone misses a training by him sincerely feels he missed something good. The other student however, has cultivated the ability to talk trainees to sleep. 
What did happen in between? Why did one student become a good trainer, and the other didn't? I think we are all here because of that question.


What about the two students in the beginning? One of them reached greatness as a teacher, the other developed a talent to talk people to sleep. As a parent, I certainly value the ability of talking people to sleep. Yet I'd prefer to keep that out of the classroom.
For sure, this model is not enough to make a good trainer over 20 years. But I am pretty sure the good trainer knows more than one method.

-------------


First patient: a young PhD student, 25. Has his first course to teach next
week. Lets see. You just want to check whether everything is OK.
You're bright, you're ambitious, you want to deliver a good course, and
don't go there just because there are some nice girls, do you?
Just make sure to include some practical examples and check some current
literature before.

Next patient: Postdoc, 35, a little cushion around the waist.
You are a good scientist. Ah, you are sometimes feeling a little stiff
when teaching. How often do you prepare exercises? Once or twice a week?
I know I should do but got this big grant application coming up. Do you
drink coffee in your courses? Hm. Are your students heads smoking
sometimes?
Yes, I tried to stop that many times, but I never found the energy.

OK, your're a good scientist. I will prescribe you alternative teaching methods. But to be honest, this is not the main problem. You need to alter your style of research. I know your career is important, but you should
spend less time in the lab and a little more time with your students.

Next patient: Professor, 55 years. He's got Basics of Bioinformatcs. When did it start? 10 minutes ago? Quick, we need to move him into the lecture hall! Lets see what we have: Oh this is worse than I expected. He hasn't changed anything in his material in the last 3 years. I will try to remove some outdated examples. Students' blood pressure and breathing are slowing down. Lets email him the exam questions. He's not responding. students are falling unconscious.

There is nothing we can do now. Lets keep the students in artificial coma until we found a solution. This patient is in a critical condition. That is the situation we have today. Time to turn to the experts - You.

